# Performance Grading of Clustering Algorithms on Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Proteins

## Abstract
Computational studies continue to serve an important role in
modeling and understanding protein dynamics in biology.
Molecular Dynamics (MD) can model the molecular structures of
proteins and simulate their motion over nanosecond-microsecond
time scales using classical mechanics. MD simulations can reveal
insights into the folding process that are beyond present
laboratory means. When trajectories of the proteins' motion are
generated by MD simulation, machine learning algorithms like k-
means, spectral, and subspace clustering help identify the
structures and processes that are integral to the folding process,
which is challenging to do by eye. We aimed to evaluate the
performance of these various algorithms with a special focus on
the recent hybrid spectral/subspace method by comparing their
normalized mutual information (NMI) scores over cumulative
simulation time. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was
performed to visualize the trajectories and their clustering results.
The theory of protein dynamics suggests that given an infinite
amount of time the sampling space should become increasingly
mixed. Algorithms that can still identify distinct structures are
better suited for clustering MD data. We found that the hybrid
spectral/subspace method delivered the best performance overall,
and provided the most conservative estimate of the sampling
adequacy.

## Introduction and Background
MD simulations are a common tool in computational biology for
simulating the dynamic behavior of biomolecular structures like
proteins. Classical mechanics model the forces acting on the proteins
on a molecular level and computers simulate the effects, allowing for
exploration of the energy landscape of the protein, and consequently
the conformation states of the protein. Of special interest is the
protein’s native conformation state, which determines the protein’s
function. This can be important in a myriad of scientific interests
including supporting the design of safe and effective drugs, vaccine
production, study of neurodegenerative diseases and other
biomedical research.
However, while MD simulation is an effective way of studying protein
folding, it is computationally expensive. For protein folding that
happens beyond the millisecond range, healthy exploration of the
possible conformation states can take an unfeasible amount of time
(months or years). Protein also get stuck negotiating energy barriers
on the way to their native conformations. Consequently, automated
methods that can accurately organize protein conformations are
especially useful to the computational biologist studying proteins
and protein folding. We investigate four clustering algorithms and
assess their impact through comparative analysis.


## Discussion
For computational biologists, the more accurate the algorithm, the
better. The hybrid spectral/subspace method performed quite well,
boasting the highest NMI in the most difficult space.
• Sci-kit learn’s ordinary k-means algorithm delivered very
respectable performance and often beat out spectral and
subspace. However, manual hyperparameter optimization may
have hid the clustering power of the spectral and subspace
algorithms.
• Different forcefields for the same protein may affect the robustness
of the clustering algorithms. Further inquiry is required.

## Research Poster
